So what's now the idea
behind using containers?
Well, right now we're running this test job
directly on this Ubuntu machine provided by GitHub Actions,
so on some server that comes with
that Linux distribution installed on it provided by GitHub.
And just to be very clear, there is nothing wrong with that.
You can absolutely run your jobs
directly on these runner machines,
and in many cases there's absolutely no reason
to use containers instead,
we had no problems using
these runner machines throughout this course.
But it could make sense to use containers
with your own definitions or based on public based images
to have full control over the existing environment
in certain cases.
To show you one example
where using a container could make sense
is my own website, academind.com.
There, I also have a testing job
and this is the real deployment workflow
or part of the real deployment workflow
which I use for my own website.
And in this testing job, I'm using this playwright tool
to run some integration tests.
Now what this tool does is it opens different browsers
and tests the website in different browsers.
And here I'm using a base image provided by the team
behind this playwright testing tool
that actually comes with all these browsers pre-installed.
I'm doing this so that I don't have to add
an extra step here in my workflow
where I would install these browsers manually.
I could do this as well,
but it would take some extra time for which I'm paying,
since I'm paying for execution time here
in my private repository.
And besides paying for that time
it also simply wastes some time
if I can just use this predefined environment
that has all these browsers installed,
and where I therefore don't have to go
through these installation steps manually.
So that's one example where I actually put one job,
the testing job, in this real workflow into a container.
A container that's based on some image
that comes with a certain environment,
which I want to use here,
an environment that has certain browsers pre-installed.
Now here, back to our simpler example in this course,
we technically don't need an image
we could just run all these steps
on just the runner machine, it would work just fine
but we can also put all these steps into a container
by using some base image,
so some base environment, simply to see how that would work.
And that's exactly what we're going to do here.
And to put a job and its steps into a container
all you have to do is you have to add the container key here
to your job definition in your workflow definition file.
So nested below your job identifier,
you put the keyword container.
And then as a value for this container
you can specify the name of the image which you want to use.
For example, node.
Now, when it comes to these image names you can use
you have to use names of images
that are available on public repositories.
Like for example, Docker Hub,
which is the official docker image repository.
You could publish your own images on Docker Hub as well
but you also find many official images there.
For example, a base image that comes
with just Ubuntu installed,
but also an image for the Postgres database
if you needed an environment
that comes with that database pre-installed.
And amongst all these other images
you for example, also find a node image here
which gives you an environment
that comes with Node.js pre-installed.
And if you then click on such an image here on Docker Hub
you learn more about it
and about the different versions of the image are available
and how they differentiate from each other,
and what's included in this image.
And now here I could use node,
which is one possible identifier I can use
or node:16, which is a different identifier I can use
which gives me a image based on Node Version 16.
And I can run all my steps of this job in a container
that's based on this image
because all docker containers are based on some image.
As an alternative to this way
of defining the container image,
we can also add a nested image key
and define our image like this.
This syntax is important
if you also have further information
you want to pass into your container.
For example, some environment variable values
that might be needed by this image.
And that's important, environment variable values
that are needed by the image itself, not by your steps,
that will then later run in the image.
Those environment variables which are needed by your steps
stay in the env configuration
which stays on the same level as container.
This nested env field for the container
is just about environment variables
that are directly needed by the image,
and if an image would need such variables
it would be mentioned in the official image documentation
or if you're using your own image,
which as mentioned before,
could also be published to Docker Hub
so that you can use it,
then you would of course know
which environment variables that image might need.
Here for this node image,
no environment variables are needed
and therefore that's all I need to specify here
to make sure that all these steps
which belong to the test job
will run inside of the container
based on this node image
and therefore inside of an environment
that comes with Node Version 16 installed.
Now this will then all still run on this Ubuntu machine,
but this machine will just host the image.
The steps running in the image
will not have direct access to the machine
and will not have direct access to the tools
made available by that machine.
Instead, they really run in that environment
defined by that container.
You can still use ever GitHub Actions
like the checkout or cache action though,
that all still works.
GitHub Actions make sure that all these steps
still work as before even though they're now running
in a container technically.
And with that all done,
I can of course create a new commit here
and give it a message of
put test job into container
and then push this to trigger a new action,
or workflow run to be precise.
And what you should see is that as this workflow
is being executed that it still works as before
and all these steps run successfully
but now they're technically running in this extra container.
So let's wait for this job to really start here.
Here we go, it did start.
And what you see is that it,
first of all, initialized containers
where it basically made sure that docker was set up
and the container environment was created,
the environment for that one job that we put in a container.
Therefore here it actually downloaded that node 16 image
which I used as a base
and it then performed all the steps needed
to spin up that docker container
and then all the steps were executed
inside of that container.
So that is what happened here.
And with that, we have the same result as before
but technically we ran all these steps
in a different environment
and that can of course be very useful
if you need full control over the environment
in which you're running your jobs.